Now that we know how
to write basic tests,
let's have a look at
how to avoid having
to start external dependencies
and mock them instead.
There are mock frameworks available
and it's actually one of the core
concepts with good unit testing.
Unit testing is about your code.
It's not about how it integrates
with other components.
So you should be able to
just provide some sort of
a fixed functionality whenever it
comes to using external resources
and knowing what those external
resources provide
to your code, allows you to more reliably
predict your code's behavior, should
it behave the way it was supposed to.
There are several ways of
mocking your resources,
but generally you provide objects.
Classes that basically alter
the behavior of the original
class were it to be used,
such as, for example,
a datastore returning always
the same value regardless of what
parameters it will be called. Where as
in fact, a real datastore would have
contacted a database and made a query.
We would generally use
CDI annotations to load
the mocked objects with
a higher priority than the
original ones at testing time.
Such as for example,
marking implementation of a mock
with an @Alternative annotation,
setting it a higher priority and
making it a dependent bean of
the injection point class in order to
ensure that it is disposed off
whenever it's not needed anymore.
Quarkus actually uses CDI to combine
these 3 annotations
into 1 and provides us
a stereotype annotation called Mock.
It's io.quarkus.test.Mock.
Literally it is a
combination of @Alternative,
@Dependent and @Priority of 1,
which gives the class the highest
priority among all available classes.
And wherever it can be injected,
that alternative will be used
instead of the real one.
So to implement actual mocks,
you need to create the class in
the src/test/java
subdirectory of your project,
obviously because you only
want to use it in testing.
And in addition to
annotating it with mock,
you can also annotate it with
a desired specific scope
annotation instead of dependent.
An example code,
let's say we have a
datastore object which
has a method retrieve, we want to mock it,
so we create a DataStoreMock
which extends it.
We annotate it with the @Mock
annotation and we simply
override the methods that we want to mock.
You can see here that regardless of
what parameter the retrieve
method is invoked with,
it will always return
the same new resource.
Then how we can use it in
the test is even simpler.
We simply inject a datastore
as if we would have anyway
and we can now rely because
we have used the @Mock annotation,
we can rely on the fact
that this alternative
will be injected into
this injection point
and of course, then also
used in the test code.
@Mock annotation is simple enough to use,
but if many tests require
different mocks for the same bean,
then unfortunately the approach
can become difficult to maintain
because it's really difficult to
have multiple implementations at
the same time that behave
differently depending on where
they are called from, right?
So Mockito actually helps us achieve
those different behaviors
depending on the context
because we no longer create a
separate class and load it,
we actually simply override behavior
wherever we need to override it.
The main goal of Mockito is basically to
provide a simple way of writing mocks.
Mocks that are readable have clean
verification errors when they fail,
and even provide the minimal API for
building stubs and verifications.
You simply need to add
the quarkus-junit5-mockito extension to
your project and use the Mockito class
with several static methods
that you can use to simplify
the mock to configure
its desired behavior.
Just like RESTAssured Mockito
uses a when, then structure.
So first, if we look at the code sample,
we create a mock of a datastore
in the test method by
invoking the mock method with
the class signature or
class type as a parameter,
then we configure it's desired
behavior saying that
whenever somebody invokes the datastore.retrieve method with the uuid,
what should be returned
is a new Data object with
the following parameters, and
this will just simply override
whatever behavior would have been already
implemented in the Datastore.class.
Similarly, we can use,
for example, Throw methods not return.
If somebody retrieves an
object with a null uuid,
then we will Throw a
NullPointerException here.
Then there are other additional methods
that you can use such as for example,
thenAnswer, thenCallRealMethod
and if you do not provide
a stub definition,
Mockito will just simply
return the default value.
So you are literally,
you do not have to
override the entire set
of methods in the mock class.
If you do not, then a default value will
simply be false for boolean type,
null for general objects,
an emptyString or 0 for integers.
And of course, if there's
a collection involved,
it would have been returned empty.
If you need to provide behavior
for a broader set of input values,
then you can use argument matchers.
Mockito provides argument
matchers such as,
for example, anyString,
anyList, anyIterable, anyInt,
anyCollectionOf, or the
most generic one, any.
It will just simply match any
parameter regardless of its value.
So for example, if we
always wanted
the datastore to
return the same data object,
regardless of what parameters it was called with,
we would simply say
configure the DataStore,
mock such that whenever anyone calls
retrieve method with any parameter,
simply return this
particular piece of data.
Instead of creating a mock
explicitly, an instance of a mock
by calling Mockito.mock,
you can simply define the
field in the test class
and then inject the mock
using @InjectMock annotation
and then simply configure
the desired behavior based on
whatever test you need to use it in.
So you can see that the behaviors can
be configured independently of each other.
It is also possible
using Mockito to verify
that your mocked objects
have actually been invoked.
And that is not meant to
be used directly with
direct invocations from your
test code because obviously,
you see that invocations are there.
Verifications are useful
for situations where,
let's say you invoke web services
endpoint and that web service is expected
to invoke a database operation.
Now instead of providing it
with just a mock object,
you can provide it with an object that is
designed to perform
accounting of some sort.
And then you simply invoke the end
point of the web service and ask the,
accounting sort of
mock whether an operation has
actually been performed or not.
The method we would use
is Mockito.verify
and it's typically used
at the end of a test.
What this method does is it receives
a mocked object and
returns an object that actually
shares the interface of the mock.
Except that the logic this
object executes is dependent on
whether a method is called and if
specified how many times it was called.
And you have certain static
methods that you can use to
configure what is the allowable number
of invocations for a verified object?
In the code example here,
these static methods have
already been imported.
And then we verify, for example,
that the dataStore's get method
has been invoked exactly 1 times.
We invoke it once more,
and then we verify that it's been invoked
exactly 2 times or atMost 2 times
and that the get with the parameter
of one has never been invoked.
If a specific verification fails,
then an exception is raised,
one that is a member of org.mockito.exceptions.verification package.
So it's relatively easy to figure out
what exactly the problem was upon
receiving the exception.
Mockito has recently added support to
mocking static methods of classes as well,
not just methods on object instances.
Now, the use of Mockito still allows
you to mock also the Panache.
For example, ActiveRecord
methods which are all static.
But there is already also a PanacheMock object,
which is still the simplest way of
using Panache classes and it's
static methods in your test.
What you do need is to add
the quarkus-panache-mock
extension to your pom.xml file
and then use the class exactly
as you would use Mockito's
mock, except that you will use
PanacheMock.mock methods.
You can create the stubs for mocked class using
Mockito like you would normally
do on the received mock object,
such as in this example.
So instead of Mockito.mock,
we simply invoke PanacheMock.mock
assuming that Data.class is
an instance of a Panache entity.
And then we simply say, okay!
whenever somebody invokes a find method
searching for the name of Joseph,
then simply always return
this particular object.
Or if and then we essentially exercise the
configured mock and assert that
the result is what we have expected.
Let's see how this all works in practice,
join us in the next video,
which is the exercise.